[Music]
her eyes and ears that were closed for
the first two weeks of her life are now
opening and with this comes a whole new
world of sensory stimulation she uses
her vision to move around but does she
see the world the same way we do well
dogs are colorblind but that doesn't
mean that everything is black and white
she does see color but mostly just blues
and yellows it's because she only has
two types of color receptors compared to
humans who have three and it's also why
your dog will often ignore an orange toy
in the green grass as those colors look
the same to them better to give them
something blue
but it's when things are moving that her
vision comes into its own dog's eyes
process what they see more quickly than
we do it's almost like they see in slow
motion
that's why they're always in the right
place to catch the frisbee
psychology professor John pilly was
interested in finding out how many words
a dog had learned you did you and seven
years ago he found the perfect student
chasing using crate loads of toys John
and his colleagues devised a
groundbreaking study of canine
intelligence the toys all have names
that chaser has learned throughout her
life and John picks eight at random
chase let spice up chase fine punt go
get one ray pop up play do it go do it
yeah interpret yeah good girl
chase fine roach good girl never looks
at the toys on the mat so to pick the
right object chaser has to actually
understand what he's saying
yeah there's wow eat up eat up in three
years of intensive training chaser has
learned an astounding 1022 words that's
a hundred and sixteen balls 26 frisbees
and over 800 cloth animals but how does
she do it
[Music]
on the mass are five items chaser knows
and one new one she's never seen a cat
that John calls me out to do it do it do
it go pop up this task involves a highly
complex logic the new word isn't in
chasers vocabulary so she has to
understand that it might refer to an
unfamiliar object do it get me out
I want me out do it go do it right now
the way to solve the puzzle is by a
process of elimination
get me out do it do it
there's meow c'mere c'mere - only one
trial the new toy and the sound and ow
are lodged in her brain watch me catch
yeah and it just goes to show that you
can teach an old dog new tricks to see
African Wild Dogs in the flesh is a real
privilege it's thought there may only be
3,000 left in the wild making them one
of the most endangered mammals in Africa
Aladin the alpha-male where's the radio
collar it really is quite fascinating to
watch an Alfa pair always together
always together
the man is constantly tailing behind her
wherever she goes
Aladin and feather have only been
together for four months but they're
already off to a flying start feather is
visibly pregnant but even though he's
now done the job she is pregnant with
his pups he doesn't leave her side for
one minute
[Music]
it's unusual for an alpha male to be so
attentive at this stage Aladin seems to
be a particularly devoted partner
[Music]
Taron has been monitoring feather and
aladdin's progress from the start so
tell me a little bit about how Aladdin
and feather behaved with each other as
the Alfa pair we've often seen him with
his chin resting on her ear and just
following her around and he's been
observed sleeping with his paw on her
not its typical it's what we call mate
guarding behavior he's looking after her
he's making sure that she's that she's
fed and healthy once she's pregnant
he continues to follow her even though
he's already done his job and fathered
her litter and I think that's his way of
ensuring that his litter of paps
survives and is healthy Aladdin and
feather look like a solid couple and
that's good news for everyone else in
the group because as the Alfa pair it's
their job to provide the pack with new
pups so is that it are they completely
established and their roles are
determined and everything's hunky-dory
with the whole pack so far so good the
the key will be how successful they are
at raising that litter of pups as a pack
the success of a pack always depends on
on the on the reproductive system
success so how well they work together
to successfully rear their young so
they're not home free not at all so
whenever you get a new alpha pair it
doesn't mean anything until they've
successfully reared their first letter
oh gosh no pressure
fortunately for Aladdin and feather the
rest of the group will be there to lend
a helping hand the other adult females
are feather sisters and the male's come
from different packs
like um the rest behind us it's one big
happy family where everyone pitches in
there are a few places on Svalbard where
people live year round one of them is
the Polish research station at Horn
esand they've had beers visit them this
year but no fatal run-ins thanks to
tried and tested polar bear warning
system that's my daughter's name Liliana
cos Lincoln Everett has worked at the
base for almost a year she's the bravest
one if a polar bear walks walks in the
dogs start barking and skid do they
scare off most times dogs like Lola bark
as soon as they get a whiff of a beer
this gives the researchers time to come
out with a flare gun and scare it off
for Lola here how close has she been to
a polar bear well she was attacked four
years ago was she yes she had some
stitches on her after she was attacked
by the polar bear did her attitude
change towards him was she more scared
no she just got to know brave just only
a job yes from the polar bears that
you've seen come through here have you
noticed that some are more curious that
they do have different personalities
yeah some are scared once and they go
away some are really just so starving so
it's so hungry I do think it's great the
way that the dog senses are used to keep
people safe from polar bears they'll get
an excellent hearing fantastic sense of
smell and there's absolutely no
technology in the world that can detect
polar bears as good as a dog can it's a
small sign of hope there are ways to
keep both people and polar bears safe
Max is a red collie cross normally full
of energy and enthusiasm but in 2008 his
owner maureen burns noticed that
something was wrong I thought at the
time max was fading he was nine and a
half and I was preparing myself for
losing him because of he just wasn't
happy wouldn't come with me wouldn't sit
by me wouldn't sit on my lap and the odd
signs he would come up and touch him a
breast with his nose and back off so
desperately unhappy but there's such a
sad look in his eyes
Maureen had a small lump in her breast
but her latest mammogram was clear
so she presumed all was okay initially I
thought just another lumpy breasts as
people get but then I sort of connected
it with the dog with his odd behavior
and one day I was looking in the mirror
in the bedroom here and I looked across
in the mirror at max his eyes he was on
the bed as he is now and I knew it was
cancer Mori went to her local hospital
but both a scan and a mammogram came
back negative
he took a surgical biopsy to finally
detect the cancer
Maureen had it removed and the change in
Max's behavior was instant the day I was
picked up from the hospital he was his
old hyper self again
he put his nose across my breast to
check where the operation had been and
he was wagging his tail his eyes were
happy and it was unbelievable that
changing him instant I love max so much
and I owe him so much and even before I
go for a check-up now I get him to check
me out and if he's happy and wagging his
tail I am happy and I know I'm okay we
now know that dogs like max are smelling
the tiny volatile chemicals given off by
cancerous tumors most dogs can do this
they just don't know that we're
interested but with a little training
dogs can accurately pick out a cancerous
patient from a selection of urine
samples they can even be taught to let
diabetics like Steven know that his
blood sugar levels are smelling low long
before he can feel it and definitely
before he passes out dogs like Stevens
are now transforming lives all over the
country they're being trained to detect
the early warning signals for severe
allergic reactions epileptic fits and
narcolepsy
[Music]